---
layout: post
title: What AGI Needs
categories: [LLMs]
---



To adapt to novelty, you need two things. First, you need knowledge – a set of reusable functions or programs to draw upon. LLMs have more than enough of that. Second, you need the ability to recombine these functions into a brand new program when facing a new task – a program that models the task at hand. Program synthesis. LLMs have long lacked this feature. The o series of models fixes that.

For now, we can only speculate about the exact specifics of how o3 works. But o3's core mechanism appears to be natural language program search and execution within token space – at test time, the model searches over the space of possible Chains of Thought (CoTs) describing the steps required to solve the task, in a fashion perhaps not too dissimilar to AlphaZero-style Monte-Carlo tree search. In the case of o3, the search is presumably guided by some kind of evaluator model. To note, Demis Hassabis hinted back in a June 2023 interview that DeepMind had been researching this very idea – this line of work has been a long time coming.

There are however two significant differences between what's happening here and what I meant when I previously described "deep learning-guided program search" as the best path to get to AGI. Crucially, the programs generated by o3 are natural language instructions (to be "executed" by a LLM) rather than executable symbolic programs. This means two things. First, that they cannot make contact with reality via execution and direct evaluation on the task – instead, they must be evaluated for fitness via another model, and the evaluation, lacking such grounding, might go wrong when operating out of distribution. Second, the system cannot autonomously acquire the ability to generate and evaluate these programs (the way a system like AlphaZero can learn to play a board game on its own.) Instead, it is reliant on expert-labeled, human-generated CoT data.
